pṛthostu naptā pṛthudharmakarmaṭha:
prācīnabarhiryuvatau śatadrutau |
pracetaso nāma sucetasa: sutā-
najījanattvatkaruṇāṅkurāniva ||1||
pṛtho:-tu naptā	Prithu's great grand son
pṛthu-dharma-karmaṭha:	intensely performing righteous deeds
prācīnabarhi:-	named Praacheenbarhi
yuvatau śatadrutau	through young Shatadruti
pracetasa: nāma	by the name of Prachetas
sucetasa: sutān-	pure minded sons (ten)
ajījanat-	gave birth to
tvat-karuṇā-aṅkurān-iva	like sprouts of Thy compassion embodied
Prithu's great grand son Praacheenbarhis, who was reputed for his undertakings for the good of the world had the young lady Shatadruti for his wife. From her, as though sprouts of Thy compassion ,ten noble minded sons were born to him known by the group name of Prachetas.
pitu: sisṛkṣāniratasya śāsanād-
bhavattapasyābhiratā daśāpi te
payonidhiṃ paścimametya tattaṭe
sarovaraṃ sandadṛśurmanoharam ||2||
pitu: sisṛkṣā-niratasya	the father who was intent on creation
śāsanāt-	by his direction
bhavat-tapasyā-abhiratā daśa-api te	those ten engrossed upon meditating on Thee
payonidhiṃ paścimam-etya	going to the western sea
tat-taṭe sarovaraṃ sandadṛśu:-	on its shore saw a lake
manoharaṃ	beautiful
Commanded by their father to multiply the species, these ten brothers, being firm believers in the importance of Thy worship, went to the western sea to meditate. On the shore of that sea they saw a beautiful lake.
tadā bhavattīrthamidaṃ samāgato
bhavo bhavatsevakadarśanādṛta: |
prakāśamāsādya pura: pracetasā-
mupādiśat bhaktatamastava stavam ||3||
tadā bhavat-tīrtham-idam	then this Thy holy lake
samāgata: bhava:	frequented by Shiva
bhavat-sevaka-darśana-ādṛta:	eager to see Thy devotees
prakāśam-āsādya	manifested himself
pura: pracetasām-	before the Prachetas
upādiśat	and taught
bhaktatama:-	(himself) a great devotee to (Thee)
tava stavaṃ	Thy great hymn
Then, Thy greatest devotee, Lord Shiva who is always eager to see Thy devotees, came to this holy lake of Thine and appearing before the Prachetaas, taught them a great hymn in praise of Thee.
stavaṃ japantastamamī jalāntare
bhavantamāseviṣatāyutaṃ samā: |
bhavatsukhāsvādarasādamīṣviyān
babhūva kālo dhruvavanna śīghratā ||4||
stavaṃ japanta:-tam-amī	that hymn singing, these (Prachetaas)
jala-antare	in the water
bhavantam-āseviṣata-	on Thee meditated
ayutaṃ samā:	for ten thousand years
bhavat-sukha-āsvād-rasāt-	because of the joy they were experiencing in meditating on Thee
amīṣu-	for them
iyān babhūva kāla:	such a long time passed
dhruvavat-na śīghratā	like Dhruva it did not happen quickly
These devotees chanting the hymn, spent ten thousand years in water, in Thy worship and meditation on Thee. For the attainment of the bliss of Thy realisation, they had to spend this long period in austerities unlike Dhruva who got it very quickly.
tapobhireṣāmatimātravardhibhi:
sa yajñahiṃsānirato'pi pāvita: |
pitā'pi teṣāṃ gṛhayātanārada-
pradarśitātmā bhavadātmatāṃ yayau ||5||
tapobhi:-eṣām-	by their penance
ati-mātra-vardhibhi:	which was increasing in intensity
sa yajña-hiṃsā-nirata:-api	he, though engaged in killing animals for the sacrifices
pāvita:	became purified
pitā-api teṣāṃ	(he) their father
gṛhayāta-nārada-	(to whose) house Naarada went
pradarśita-ātmā	(from Naarada) obtaining the knowledge of Aatman
bhavat-ātmatāṃ yayau	attained to Thee
By the increasing strength of their penance, their father Praacheenbarhis also became purified who had slain many animals in the sacrificial fires. Naarada who had gone to his house, gave him the knowledge of Aatman by which he attained a form like Thine.
kṛpābalenaiva pura: pracetasāṃ
prakāśamāgā: patagendravāhana: |
virāji cakrādivarāyudhāṃśubhi-
rbhujābhiraṣṭābhirudañcitadyuti: ||6||
kṛpā-balena-eva	by Thy compassion alone
pura: pracetasāṃ	before the Prachetas
prakāśam-āgā:	Thou manifested Thyself
patagendra-vāhana:	having Garuda as vehicle
virāji cakra-ādi-vara-āyudha-aṃśubhi:-	lustrous by the resplendent discus and other divine weapons
bhujābhi:-aṣṭābhi:-	glorious with eight arms
udañcita-dyuti:	spreading lustre
By virtue of Thy compassion alone, Thou appeared before the Prachetas. Thou were seated on Thy vehicle Garuda, having eight arms, holding the resplendent discus and other divine weapons and spreading lustre all around.
pracetasāṃ tāvadayācatāmapi
tvameva kāruṇyabharādvarānadā: |
bhavadvicintā'pi śivāya dehināṃ
bhavatvasau rudranutiśca kāmadā ||7||
pracetasāṃ tāvat-	to the Prachetas, then
ayācatām-api	though unsought for
tvam-eva kāruṇya-bharāt-	Thou Thyself out of infinite compassion
varān-adā:	gave boons
bhavat-vicintā-api	even the thought of Thee
śivāya dehināṃ bhavatu-	may be for the benefit of the humans
asau rudranuti:-ca	this Rudra hymn also
kāmadā (bhavatu)	may be a fulfiller of desires
Out of Thy infinite compassion, Thou gave the Prachetas boons,even without their asking. May even Thy thought be for the benefit of the humans and confer welfare on them, and may the Rudra hymn be the fulfiller of all desires.
avāpya kāntāṃ tanayāṃ mahīruhāṃ
tayā ramadhvaṃ daśalakṣavatsarīm |
suto'stu dakṣo nanu tatkṣaṇācca māṃ
prayāsyatheti nyagado mudaiva tān ||8||
avāpya kāntāṃ	getting as wife
tanayāṃ mahīruhāṃ	the daughter of the trees
tayā ramadhvaṃ	with her enjoy
daśalakṣa-vatsarīm	for ten lakhs of years
suta:-astu dakṣa:	may you have a son named Daksha
nanu tat-kṣaṇāt-	immediately then
ca māṃ prayāsyatha-iti	attain me also, thus
nyagada:	saying so
mudā-eva tān	pleasingly to them
Being highly pleased with the Prachetas Thou blessed them that they would get the daughter of the trees as their wife. They would lead a happy life with her for ten lakh of years. Also that they would have a son named Daksha and soon thereafter they would attain Thee.
tataśca te bhūtalarodhinastarūn
krudhā dahanto druhiṇena vāritā: |
drumaiśca dattāṃ tanayāmavāpya tāṃ
tvaduktakālaṃ sukhino'bhiremire ||9||
tata:-ca te	then they (the trees)
bhū-tala-rodhina:-tarūn	which were covering the whole surface of the earth, the trees,
krudhā dahanta:	burning (the trees) in anger
druhiṇena vāritā:	were stopped by Brahmaa
drumai:-ca dattāṃ tanayām-	the trees gave their daughter
avāpya tāṃ	(they) getting her
tvat-ukta-kālaṃ	for the duration mentioned by Thee
sukhina:-abhiremire	they lived happily
Then the Prachetas who were angered by the dense growth of the trees which were covering the surface of the whole earth and causing obstruction, started to burn them. They were dissuaded by Brahmaa to do so. Obligingly the trees gave them their daughter in marriage and they lived with her happily for the time specified by Thee.
avāpya dakṣaṃ ca sutaṃ kṛtādhvarā:
pracetaso nāradalabdhayā dhiyā |
avāpurānandapadaṃ tathāvidha-
stvamīśa vātālayanātha pāhi mām ||10||
avāpya dakṣaṃ ca sutaṃ	and getting the son named Daksha
kṛta-adhvarā:	(and) having performed Brahma Satra
pracetasa:	the Prachetas
nārada-labdhayā dhiyā	with the knowledge received from Naarada
avāpu:-ānanda-padaṃ	attained the state of bliss
tathā-bidha:-tvam-	Thou who are thus
īśa	O Lord!
vātālayanātha	Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi mām	protect me.
After begetting the son Daksha and performing several sacrificial rites and having received the highest knowledge from Naarada they attained liberation. O Lord! O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who are of such merciful nature, grant protection to me.